.ve-media wc:J%C3%A4gala_HEP,Sept2009.jpg static

# Chornobyl, *Stalker,* and Being Human as Praxis

The bar is nearly empty, the screen a sickly yellow. A man enters, waiting. The score, a haunted and visceral scream of electronic orchestration, accompanies the credits as they roll across the screen. 

.ve-media https://youtu.be/Q3hBLv-HLEc autoplay start=131 end=422

The bedroom is seen from above, a glass of water skittering across a table as a train rumbles by. This is our introduction to the Stalker (==Alexander Kaidanovsky=={Q620653}), seen here in his home with his wife (==Alisa Freindlich=={Q271630}) and his young daughter, Monkey. As he gets up and prepares to leave, his wife begs him not to return to that place, not to risk yet another prison sentence, not to risk his life in this foolish endeavor. The Stalker, shrugging off her entreaties, leaves to meet his clients. 

His destination is the Zone, a restricted site of strange goings-on. His clients are the Writer (==Anatoly Solonitsyn=={Q787038}) and the Professor (==Nikolai Grinko=={Q603381})—none of the main three characters are given names beyond their professions—who seek the Room, a space in the Zone said to grant one’s innermost desire. Unlike the Writer and the Professor, who maintain cynical, rational, and somewhat unconvicted attitudes towards the journey and their destination, the Stalker is a true believer in the power of the Room and the ability of the Zone to catalyze happiness, self-knowledge, and ecstasy. With an almost dogmatic devotion of the faithful, he maintains his refusal to enter the Room, instead making his illicit living by leading clients through the Zone. 

The opening crawl, stylized as the testimony of a scientist, gives a brief, if characteristically opaque, “explanation” of the Zone’s origins: “Was it a meteorite or a visitation from outer space? Whatever it was, in our small country there appeared a miracle—the Zone. We sent in troops. No one returned. Then we surrounded the Zone with a security cordon. We did right… Although I’m not sure. I’m not sure.” In ==Arkady and Boris Strugatsky=={Q153796}’s 1971 novella, ==*Roadside Picnic*=={Q848517}, the source material for ==Andrei Tarkovsky=={Q853}’s 1979 film, the Zone is one of many sites produced in the aftermath of a brief moment of alien contact that has resulted in a trove of extraterrestrial technology left behind as detritus. Alien contact, the Strugatsky brothers propose, would be akin to these celestial visitors having a picnic on the Earth-as-roadside. What if, the book posits, aliens weren’t terribly interested in making contact with or conquering us? What if they didn’t think about us at all? 

This kind of contact, or lack thereof, with another form of life prompts an inevitable question: what does it mean to be human? ==Sylvia Wynter=={Q3507232}, a philosopher and cultural theorist who works across the fields of history, literature, post-colonial studies, science, and Black studies, troubles the underlying presumptions of such an inquiry. Wynter is skeptical of the category of “human” as universal and consistent. She instead posits the notion of being human as praxis: human-ness as something enacted rather than inherent. She sees the practice of being human as comprised of two components: the biological (our genetics, our bodily attributes that distinguish us as a species) and the cosmogonic (the origin stories we tell ourselves to make sense of our place in the world). Wynter’s theories are important to framing human-ness as a heterogeneous and unfixed concept, a category that is constructed both biologically and socially, as much about the indescribable, ineffable emotions and narratives we possess as our physical bodies in space. To be human, Wynter suggests, is to be constantly remade and redefined, to exist in a state of relational slippage. 

This sense of the human as navigating estranged terrain is evident throughout *Stalker*. The Zone is initially presented as hostile and perilous. Surrounded by a heavily militarized perimeter, the trio must slip in past the imposed boundaries of the “real world.” As they enter the Zone on a small rail car, the clack of the rails and the distorted echoing music signal the transition to this new landscape, a gradual passage that becomes at once something startling and new with the Wizard of Oz-like introduction of color, the Zone lush and green as silence reigns. The Stalker leaves his clients to walk a short distance away for a moment of peace and solitude. Tarkovsky lingers on the Stalker nestled among the grasses, finally at home. There is a moment of relief as he reclaims his place in this world, his belief in this world, even if it is a secret world, a distorted world. This world of the Zone is not only full of life; it appears to be alive itself, changing and adaptive like an organism. 

The Stalker warns that the Zone sets traps, that it makes decisions about who to let enter, who to impede. He uses a system of tying bandages to metal nuts and throwing them to test the viability of the path, which is circuitous, convoluted, and reiterative. The Stalker’s insistence on respecting the power of the Zone is made clear through the consequences of indifference to it: at one point, the travelers encounter bodily remains and a decaying military convoy. In another instance, the Writer, attempting to reach the Room as the crow flies, is stopped by a mysterious voice and/or impulse that compels him to return to the path. In the face of the unknown and the unexplainable, the Writer and the Professor are dependent in their faith in the Stalker and his inscrutable, ritual-like practices of guiding them. 

Throughout the journey, the characters opine, argue, reminisce, reflect, and speculate. They discuss artistic inspiration, ambition, destiny, Truth, technology, happiness. The Writer is full of bravado and cynicism, the Professor quiet reason, the Stalker a sincerity and passion. There are jealousies, bitterness, hopes, dreams, miscommunications, and deep understandings. 

Ever-present in the conversations and wanderings is the Room and its awesome and unbearable power. There is a running discussion throughout the film about Porcupine, the Stalker’s mentor. Porcupine, we are told, sacrificed his brother to the Meat Grinder, a terrifying passage in the bunker section of the Zone. When he entered the Room, he returned home a rich man. Days later, he killed himself. This story is significant, the Writer concludes, because of what it says about our most terrible inner selves. Porcupine, he reasons, intended to ask the Room for his brother back; to realize that his greatest desire was actually for riches was ultimately too great an existential blow. 

Stalker is a film in which cosmogonies loom large: what are our desires? How do we make sense of our place in the world, our relation to terrains and worlding? What are our inner dreams, and could we ever possess the poetry to make them known? At one point in the journey, the Writer opines, “How would I know the right word for what I want? How would I know that actually I don’t want what I want? Or that I actually don’t want what I don’t want? They are elusive things: the moment we name them, their meaning disappears, melts, dissolves like a jellyfish in the sun.” 

Upon reaching the Room, the trio engages in a philosophical and physical struggle: the Writer does not wish to know himself, the Professor wants to blow the Room up, the Stalker refuses to enter. All three choose not to enter, their faith and their desires to know their innermost selves left in a state of ambiguous uncertainty, a purposeful unknowing. The only thing that endows the Room with meaning is a belief in its transformative capacity. To leave, then, without ever entering is to leave in a state of suspension, in which desire and its fulfillment is sublimated to the practice of living, to the yearnings and disappointments and fathomless affective worlds of being human.

But these inflecting and refracting senses of desire and place, of shifting terrain, of spiritual longing and disenchantment, are not the only transformations undergone as a result of contact with the Zone. The Zone and the “outside world” are beginning to merge and shift within and against each other, evidenced by the reintroduction of the sepia tone during a dream sequence within the Zone before settling back into vivid, sensorial color. On the trio’s return to “real world,” a journey we do not see, the sepia tone returns—except when the camera focuses on Monkey as the Stalker is reunited with his wife and daughter. The impact of the Stalker’s incursions into the Zone is most keenly felt on his family: not only are we told that he has spent many years in prison as a result of his illegal profession, but the children of stalkers are said to be mutated as a result of parental contact with the Zone. Though the Stalker despairs that his clients will ever truly understand the Zone as a place of hope and ecstatic transformation, his wife reiterates that such affective yearnings and disappointments have given her life meaning. “I knew there’d be a lot of sorrow. But I’d rather know bittersweet happiness than a grey, uneventful life. Perhaps I invented all this later… There was a lot of grief and fear and pain. But I’ve never regretted it nor envied anyone. It’s just fate. It’s life. It’s us. And if there were no sorrow in our lives, it wouldn’t be better. It would be worse. Because then there would be no happiness either.” Thus follows the final scene, which I contend is a thesis statement for the entire film. 

In this scene of telekinesis (or is it?), Tarkovsky proposes that contact with the Zone has reconfigured what it means to be human, how we understand ourselves and our place in the world(s), what faith we have in something greater (and how we are something greater). 

Wynter is useful here in considering—or rather, rejecting—a divide between the alien and the human, the genetically normative and the mutated. Wynter’s formulation complicates the premise of humanity as monolithic, static, and consistent, and instead posits a fractured category that is hybrid and contingent (==Donna Haraway=={Q253407}’s *Cyborg Manifesto* also comes to mind in that respect). This notion of the genetic and the narrative as components of humanity speak to the biological and metaphysical questions at the heart of *Stalker*. What constitutes the human? How do we (and Wynter would complicate this singular “we,” even if Tarkovsky wouldn’t) make sense of ourselves not only in the world, but a world? How do we construct stories of love, loss, and purpose in order to imbue our lives and our very beings with meaning? How do we exist as both flesh and story? 

Tarkovsky would suggest that it is a suspended kind of care and faith, an investment in the speculative and the potential for the realization of inchoate longing and desire. As he wrote in ==*Sculpting in Time*=={Q1279432}, “In the end everything can be reduced to the one simple element which is all a person can count upon in his existence: the capacity to love. That element can grow within the soul to become the supreme factor which determines the meaning of a person’s life. My function is to make whoever sees my films aware of his need to love and to give his love, and aware that beauty is summoning him.”

